module: implement `register` utility (#46826)
nodejs/node: doc/api/module.md

isBuiltin('wss'); // false
```

### `module.register()`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> Stability: 1 - Experimental. Enable this API with the [`--experimental-loader`][] CLI flag.

```

// before importing `./my-app.mjs`.
await import('./my-app.mjs');
```

In the example above, we are registering the `http-to-https` loader,
but it will only be available for subsequently imported modules—in
this case, `my-app.mjs`. If the `await import('./my-app.mjs')` had
instead been a static `import './my-app.mjs'`, _the app would already
have been loaded_ before the `http-to-https` hooks were
registered. This is part of the design of ES modules, where static
imports are evaluated from the leaves of the tree first back to the
trunk. There can be static imports _within_ `my-app.mjs`, which
will not be evaluated until `my-app.mjs` is when it's dynamically
imported.

The `--experimental-loader` flag of the CLI can be used together
with the `register` function; the loaders registered with the
function will follow the same evaluation chain of loaders registered
within the CLI:

```console
node \
  --experimental-loader unpkg \
  --experimental-loader http-to-https \
  --experimental-loader cache-buster \
  entrypoint.mjs
```

```mjs
// entrypoint.mjs
import { URL } from 'node:url';
import { register } from 'node:module';

> const loaderPath = new URL('./my-programmatically-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const loaderURL = new URL('./my-programmatically-loader.mjs', import.meta.url);
```
or maybe
```suggestion
const loaderURL = './my-programmatically-loader.mjs';
```

Reviewer 2: Why leave it as a URL instance instead of the href?

> register(loaderPath);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
register(loaderURL);
```

await import('./my-app.mjs');
```

The `my-programmatic-loader.mjs` can leverage `unpkg`,
`http-to-https`, and `cache-buster` loaders.

It's also possible to use `register` more than once:

```mjs
// entrypoint.mjs
import { URL } from 'node:url';
import { register } from 'node:module';

> const firstLoader = new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;
> const secondLoader = new URL('./second-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const firstLoader = new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url);
const secondLoader = new URL('./second-loader.mjs', import.meta.url);
```

isBuiltin('wss'); // false
```

### `module.registerLoader()`

<!-- YAML
added: v20.x.x
-->

In addition to using the `--experimental-loader` option in the CLI,
loaders can be registered programmatically using the `module.registerLoader()`
method.

```js
import { registerLoader } from 'node:module';

registerLoader('http-to-https');

> // Loader hooks haven't been executed yet.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this comment

Author: What I mean with this comment is that if you call `registerLoader()`, your loader will only be available in the next imported module, meaning that the hooks of your loader will not be executed until `import` statement call, how I could make it clearer?

Reviewer 2: Ahh. I think the comment is more confusing than not saying anything. Other documentation already explains this better :)

> // executed before importing the module.

Author: Lint is complaining about this 🤣

> await import('./my-app.mjs'); // Same behavior of CLI: hooks will be executed before importing the module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await import('./my-app.mjs'); // Same behavior as CLI: hooks will be executed before importing the module.
```

```

In the example above, we are registering the `http-to-https` loader,

> but it will only be available in the next imported module—in this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but it will only be available for subsequently imported modules—in this
```

> case, in `my-app.mjs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
case, `my-app.mjs`.
```

> The `--experimental-loader` flag of the CLI could be used together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `--experimental-loader` flag of the CLI can be used together with
```

> the `registerLoader` function, the loaders registered with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `registerLoader` function; the loaders registered with the
```

function will follow the same execution chain of loaders registered
within the CLI:

```console
node \
  --experimental-loader unpkg \
  --experimental-loader http-to-https \
  --experimental-loader cache-buster \
  entrypoint.mjs
```

```js
// entrypoint.mjs

> import { URL } from 'node:url'
> import { registerLoader } from 'node:module'
> 
> const loaderPath = new URL('./my-programmatically-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href
> 
> registerLoader(loaderPath)
> await import('./my-app.mjs')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { URL } from 'node:url';
import { registerLoader } from 'node:module';

const loaderPath = new URL('./my-programmatically-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;

registerLoader(loaderPath);
await import('./my-app.mjs');
```

```

> The `my-programmatically-loader.mjs` could use all the resources
> provided by `unpkg`, `http-to-https` and `cache-buster` loaders.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `my-programmatic-loader.mjs` can leverage `unpkg`, `http-to-https`, and `cache-buster` loaders.
```

It's also possible to use `registerLoader` more than once:

```js
// entrypoint.mjs
import { URL } from 'node:url'
import { registerLoader } from 'node:module'

const firstLoader = new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href
const secondLoader = new URL('./second-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href

registerLoader(firstLoader)
registerLoader(secondLoader)
await import('./my-app.mjs')
```

Both loaders (`first-loader.mjs` and `second-loader.mjs`) can use all
the resources provided by the loaders registered in the CLI. But remember
that they will only be available in the next imported module (`my-app.mjs`).
The execution order of the hooks when importing `my-app.mjs` and consecutive
modules in the example above will be:

```console
resolve: second-loader.mjs
resolve: first-loader.mjs
resolve: cache-buster
resolve: http-to-https
resolve: unpkg
load: second-loader.mjs
load: first-loader.mjs
load: cache-buster
load: http-to-https
load: unpkg
globalPreload: second-loader.mjs
globalPreload: first-loader.mjs
globalPreload: cache-buster
globalPreload: http-to-https
globalPreload: unpkg

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would combine this example with the previous

Reviewer 2: Also, this is a wee bit redundant—maybe point to the ESM doc for an explanation on sequence?

Author: > I would combine this example with the previous

Do you mean join them in the same code block? Like this?:

```js
// entrypoint.mjs
import { URL } from 'node:url';
import { registerLoader } from 'node:module';

const firstLoader = new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;
const secondLoader = new URL('./second-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href;

registerLoader(firstLoader);
registerLoader(secondLoader);
await import('./my-app.mjs');

// resolve: second-loader.mjs
// resolve: first-loader.mjs
// resolve: cache-buster
// resolve: http-to-https
// resolve: unpkg
// load: second-loader.mjs
// load: first-loader.mjs
// load: cache-buster
// load: http-to-https
// load: unpkg
// globalPreload: second-loader.mjs
// globalPreload: first-loader.mjs
// globalPreload: cache-buster
// globalPreload: http-to-https
// globalPreload: unpkg
```

We could point it to ESM doc but at least for me, It feels easier to understand the behavior of `registerLoader()` using the same modules (`second-loader.mjs`, `chache-buster`, etc) to create the examples. I think I could try to use only two or three loaders to get a smaller example, what do you think?

import { URL } from 'node:url';
import { register } from 'node:module';

> register(new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url).href);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
register(new URL('./first-loader.mjs', import.meta.url));
```
